Clarify free memory pointer vs msize (#12884)
ethereum/solidity: docs/internals/layout_in_memory.rst

.. index: memory layout

***********************
Reserved Memory Areas and Memory Management Details

> ***********************

Reviewer: In RST syntax the frame has to match the length of the title.

Solidity reserves four 32-byte slots, with specific byte ranges (inclusive of endpoints) being used as follows:

- ``0x00`` - ``0x3f`` (64 bytes): scratch space for hashing methods
- ``0x40`` - ``0x5f`` (32 bytes): allocated memory size (aka. free memory pointer)

> - ``0x60`` - ``0x7f`` (32 bytes): zero slot

Reviewer: You seem to be going over each of these items in detail. Why not create a named section with a header about each one?

Author: Limited time (for now).

Every time you access memory, the EVM knows the location that was accessed. Roughly speaking, the

> maximum location you access determines the memory size of the execution of the contract. This

Reviewer: Yellow Paper calls it the *active memory* so I think we should use that term. We could define *allocated memory* and *active memory* and use these terms consistently below.
```suggestion
maximum location you access determines the size of active memory. This
```

value (in addition to total storage size, and other factors such as the instructions that are
executed) affect your gas costs. The specifics are beyond the scope of this documentation, but
memory size and storage size are important considerations. More information can be found in the

> Etherum Yellow Paper and in the EVM (go-ethereum) project and specifications.

Reviewer: I think it would be better to simply say that expanding the size of active memory costs gas and that this cost is not linear. Less vague and even shorter.

> Solidity is a high level language that is translated (compiled) into EVM instructions. Its features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Solidity is a high-level language that is translated (compiled) into EVM instructions. Its features
```

work because of the conventions Solidity defines and uses, in combination with the implementations
of complex data structures that it provides (such as multi-dimensional arrays). These data
structures require that memory be allocated (reserved) for their use, so that instructions that
execute after they're allocated don't corrupt them.

Memory allocation is a high level concept, not an EVM concept. Its implementation in Solidity relies

> on the value stored at memory location ``0x40``. That value tracks the next "unallocated" memory

Reviewer: Why quote this?
```suggestion
on the value stored at memory location ``0x40``. That value tracks the next unallocated memory
```

> on the value stored at memory location ``0x40``. That value tracks the next "unallocated" memory

Reviewer: I think it's better to name it here and then refer to it by name.
```suggestion
on the value stored at memory location ``0x40``, called the free memory pointer. The pointer tracks the next "unallocated" memory
```

address available. This is different from the highest memory address ever accessed by the contract's
code. For example, inline assembly can be written to access any memory location, whether or not it

> is beyond the value stored at ``0x40`` (the free memory pointer).

Reviewer: How about this?
```suggestion
code. Memory access opcodes in inline assembly are not restricted by the value of the free memory pointer and can freely refer to memory located beyond it.
```

> The current memory size (i.e., highest memory location accessed by the code in the current EVM 

Reviewer: I think it's not necessary to define it here again. It was already explained above.
```suggestion
The active memory size
```

> transaction) is available via the inline assembly instruction ``msize()`` (see the Yul

Reviewer: This could be a link to https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/yul.html#evm-dialect.

documentation). Separately, the value stored at ``0x40`` is also available. This value is
updated by the EVM code generated by Solidity and/or it may be manually changed by you, such as

> when implementing manual memory allocations via inline assembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
documentation). There is no dedicated opcode for accessing the free memory pointer. The address ``0x40`` is
just an ordinary memory location that is managed by code automatically generated by the compiler. In inline assembly
memory can be allocated manually by increasing the value of the pointer.
```

> The ``0x40`` free memory pointer is central to Solidity's memory allocation implementation,

Reviewer: There's no other free memory pointer :)
```suggestion
The free memory pointer is central to Solidity's memory allocation implementation,
```

but it is effectively independent of the value returned by ``msize()``. Of course, accessing the
free memory pointer itself (by definition) affects the value returned by ``msize()`` because after
such an access, the largest memory address accessed would be at least the location of the free
memory pointer plus its size: ``0x40+0x20``. The free memory pointer is accessed almost immediately

> in any Solidity contract, so this is moot.

Reviewer: Not sure if this paragraph is necessary. The text above already explained that they're completely separate mechanisms so it does not add anything.

> The memory between locations ``0x00`` and ``0x3F`` (inclusive) is called "scratch memory." It exists

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The memory between locations ``0x00`` and ``0x3F`` (inclusive) is called "scratch space." It exists
```

solely by convention. Solidity's generated code observes the convention that this area is for
extremely brief temporary use only. Since there is no guarantee that code not under your direct

> control may change that memory, it should be used only between Solidity statements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
control will not change that memory, it should be used only between Solidity statements
```

> (i.e. by inline assembly).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
control may change that memory, you should not rely on its value being preserved between statements outside of inline assembly blocks.
```

> The zero slot at ``0x60`` is used as the initial value for dynamic memory arrays and should never

Reviewer: I'd make that even stronger:
```suggestion
The zero slot at ``0x60`` is used as the initial value for dynamic memory arrays and must never
```

be written to. See :ref:`Layout of Arrays In Memory`.

> The free memory pointer points to ``0x80`` initially. The Solidity compiler generates code that

Reviewer: The initial value of the pointer is an implementation detail. And is not really true now that we have the ability to move stack variables to memory. I think we shouldn't document this.

> always places new objects at the to location pointed to by the free memory pointer. Memory is never

Reviewer: ```suggestion
always places new objects at the location pointed to by the free memory pointer. Memory is never
```

"freed" (this might change in the future). In other words, in the current version of Solidity, the

> value at ``0x40`` is never reduced by Solidity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"freed" (this might change in the future). In other words, in the current version of Solidity,
the compiler never moves the free memory pointer back.
```

.. warning::
  There are some operations in Solidity that need a temporary memory area
  larger than 64 bytes and therefore will not fit into the scratch space.
  Code for these operations therefore happens at the location pointed to

>   by the free memory pointer. Because such operations are known to be complete

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Code for these operations therefore uses the unallocated area past
  the free memory pointer. Because such operations are known to be complete
```

  before the next instruction or operation managed by Solidity, the generated
  code does not update the free memory pointer. The memory used in such operations
  may or may not be zeroed out after the operation is complete. Solidity's

>   access of that memory may affect ``msize()``. Thus, it's reasonable to expect that

Reviewer: The docs generally use a style without contractions.
```suggestion
  access of that memory may affect ``msize()``. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that
```

>   ``msize()`` might be larger than the value of the free memory pointer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    There are some operations in Solidity that need a temporary memory area
    larger than 64 bytes and therefore will not fit into the scratch space.
    Code for these operations therefore happens at the location pointed to
    by the free memory pointer. Because such operations are known to be complete
    before the next instruction or operation managed by Solidity, the generated
    code does not update the free memory pointer. The memory used in such operations
    may or may not be zeroed out after the operation is complete. Solidity's
    access of that memory may affect ``msize()``. Thus, it's reasonable to expect that
    ``msize()`` might be larger than the value of the free memory pointer.
```

  While it may seem like a good idea to use ``msize()`` to arrive at a
  definitely zeroed out memory area (by using the memory just beyond its
  return value) using such a pointer non-temporarily without updating the
  free memory pointer can have unexpected results. Nothing prevents inline aseembly
  from accessing any memory location whatsoever, but updating the free memory pointer

>   at ``0x40`` at least ensures that Solidity iself won't unexpectedly use memory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  at ``0x40`` at least ensures that Solidity itself won't unexpectedly use memory
```

>   located below its value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  from accessing any memory location whatsoever, but moving the free memory pointer forward
  at least ensures that Solidity iself will not use the memory between its old and new location.
```

  
  In brief, the memory between ``0x00 - 0x3F`` and the memory after the location
  pointed to by the free memory pointer can be considered scratch memory, and should
  not be used except between Solidity instructions via inline assembly, if

>   you know what you are doing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  pointed to by the free memory pointer can be considered scratch memory, and can be freely
  used between Solidity instructions via inline assembly, as long as you do not rely on it not being
  overwritten afterwards.
```

****************
Layout in Memory
****************

Layout of Arrays In Memory

> ================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Layout of Arrays In Memory
==========================
```

Elements in memory arrays in Solidity always occupy multiples of 32 bytes, i.e.
one slot (this is even true for ``bytes1[]``, but not for ``bytes`` and ``string``).
Multi-dimensional memory arrays are pointers to memory arrays. The length of a
dynamic array is stored at the first slot of the array and followed by the array
elements.

> Dynamically sized memory arrays (e.g., `uint[] varSizedArray`) store their length in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamically sized memory arrays (e.g., ``uint[] varSizedArray``) store their length in
```

> Dynamically sized memory arrays (e.g., `uint[] varSizedArray`) store their length in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamically sized memory arrays (e.g., `uint[] memory varSizedArray`) store their length in
```
but it would be simpler to say jsut
```suggestion
Dynamically sized memory arrays (e.g., `uint[]`) store their length in
```

the first slot pointed to by the array variable, followed by its elements in the following
slots. Although memory arrays are not resizable, they may be allocated dynamically using

> the `new` keyword. The initial value of the dynamically sized memory array variable itself,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ``new`` keyword. The initial value of the dynamically sized memory array variable itself,
```

> the `new` keyword. The initial value of the dynamically sized memory array variable itself,
> is ``0x60``, see :ref:`Reserved Memory Areas and Memory Management Details`, a slot that

Reviewer: This is also a bit of an implementation detail/optimization. I don't think we guarantee that it always is (and will be) the case.
```suggestion
the `new` keyword. An empty dynamically sized memory array variable may point at the zero slot, see :ref:`Reserved Memory Areas and Memory Management Details`, a slot that
```

(by convention) maintains a zero value. Once allocated, dynamically sized memory arrays

> cannot change their size. Inline assembly has the potential to corrupt this see
> :ref:`Memory Safety`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cannot change their size. Inline assembly has the potential to corrupt this - see
:ref:`Memory Safety`.
```

> cannot change their size. Inline assembly has the potential to corrupt this see
> :ref:`Memory Safety`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cannot change their size. Manually increasing the length of a memory array in inline assembly has the
potential to violate the :ref:`Memory Safety` rules. Decreasing the length is a safe operation.
```

.. warning::

>     Statically-sized memory arrays do not have a length field, but it might be added later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Statically-sized memory arrays do not have a length field, but it might be added in a future version
```

.. index: memory layout

***********************
Reserved Memory Areas
***********************

Solidity reserves four 32-byte slots, with specific byte ranges (inclusive of endpoints) being used as follows:

- ``0x00`` - ``0x3f`` (64 bytes): scratch space for hashing methods
- ``0x40`` - ``0x5f`` (32 bytes): allocated memory size (aka. free memory pointer)
- ``0x60`` - ``0x7f`` (32 bytes): zero slot

Every time you access memory, the EVM knows the location that was accessed. Roughly speaking, the
maximum location you access determines the size of active memory. Increasing the size of
active memory increases your gas costs non-linearly. The specifics are beyond the scope
of this documentation. More information about gas costs can be found in the Etherum Yellow Paper

> and in the EVM (go-ethereum) project and specifications.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this belongs in layout in memory section.

Solidity is a high level language that is translated (compiled) into EVM instructions. Its features
work because of the conventions Solidity defines and uses, in combination with the implementations
of complex data structures that it provides (such as multi-dimensional arrays). These data
structures require that memory be allocated (reserved) for their use, so that instructions that
execute after they're allocated don't corrupt them.

Memory allocation is a high-level concept, not an EVM concept. Its implementation in Solidity relies

> on the value stored at memory location ``0x40``. That value tracks the next unallocated memory

Reviewer 2: I'd probably use free memory pointer rather than `0x40`. And potentially document that it's currently at `0x40`.

address available. This is different from the highest memory address ever accessed by the contract's
code. Memory access opcodes in inline assembly are not restricted by the value of the free memory pointer and can freely refer to memory located beyond it.

The active memory size
transaction) is available via the inline assembly instruction ``msize()`` (see

> https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/yul.html#evm-dialect).

Reviewer 2: This link needs to be changed to a relative link.

There is no dedicated opcode for accessing the free memory pointer. The address ``0x40`` is
just an ordinary memory location that is managed by code automatically generated by the compiler. In inline assembly
memory can be allocated manually by increasing the value of the pointer.

The free memory pointer is central to Solidity's memory allocation implementation,
but it is effectively independent of the value returned by ``msize()``. Of course, accessing the
free memory pointer itself (by definition) affects the value returned by ``msize()`` because after
such an access, the largest memory address accessed would be at least the location of the free

> memory pointer plus its size: ``0x40+0x20``. The free memory pointer is accessed almost immediately

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
memory pointer plus its size: ``0x40 + 0x20``. The free memory pointer is accessed almost immediately
```

in any Solidity contract, so this is moot.

The memory between locations ``0x00`` and ``0x3F`` (inclusive) is called "scratch space." It exists
solely by convention. Solidity's generated code observes the convention that this area is for
extremely brief temporary use only. Since there is no guarantee that code not under your direct
control will not change that memory, you should not rely on its value being preserved between statements

> except within the current assembly block.

Reviewer 2: This is an interesting addition to the documentation. Probably can even go to the security considerations section.

    before the next instruction or operation managed by Solidity, the generated
    code does not update the free memory pointer. The memory used in such operations
    may or may not be zeroed out after the operation is complete. Solidity's
    access of that memory may affect ``msize()``. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that
    ``msize()`` might be larger than the value of the free memory pointer.

  While it may seem like a good idea to use ``msize()`` to arrive at a
  definitely zeroed out memory area (by using the memory just beyond its
  return value) using such a pointer non-temporarily without updating the
  free memory pointer can have unexpected results. Nothing prevents inline aseembly
  from accessing any memory location whatsoever, but updating the free memory pointer
  at ``0x40`` at least ensures that Solidity itself won't unexpectedly use memory
  located below its value.
  
  In brief, the memory between ``0x00 - 0x3F`` and the memory after the location
  pointed to by the free memory pointer can be considered scratch memory, and can be freely
  used between Solidity instructions via inline assembly, as long as you do not rely on it not being

>   overwritten afterwards.

Reviewer 2: Maybe repetitive?

****************
Layout in Memory
****************

Layout of Arrays In Memory
==========================

Elements in memory arrays in Solidity always occupy multiples of 32 bytes, i.e.
one slot (this is even true for ``bytes1[]``, but not for ``bytes`` and ``string``).
Multi-dimensional memory arrays are pointers to memory arrays. The length of a
dynamic array is stored at the first slot of the array and followed by the array
elements.

Dynamically sized memory arrays (e.g., ``uint[]``) store their length in

> the first slot pointed to by the array variable, followed by its elements in the following

Reviewer 2: slot might not be the right word to use here. `word` is more appropriate for memory.

Reviewer: True, but the page was already using that term so I think it's fine to just keep that for now and fix it later.

slots. Although memory arrays are not resizable, they may be allocated dynamically using

> the ``new`` keyword. In some versions of Solidity the initial value of the dynamically

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the ``new`` keyword. In some versions of Solidity, the initial value of the dynamically
```

.. index: memory layout

***********************
Reserved Memory Areas

> ***********************

Reviewer: You now have two top-level headings. This results in two options in the sidebar leading to the same file, which is weird. I think that `Reserved Memory Areas` should just be one of subsections under `Layout in Memory`.

Reviewer: Fixed in the version I just pushed.

- ``0x40`` - ``0x5f`` (32 bytes): allocated memory size (aka. free memory pointer)
- ``0x60`` - ``0x7f`` (32 bytes): zero slot

Solidity is a high level language that is translated (compiled) into EVM instructions. Its features
work because of the conventions Solidity defines and uses, in combination with the implementations
of complex data structures that it provides (such as multi-dimensional arrays). These data
structures require that memory be allocated (reserved) for their use, so that instructions that
execute after they're allocated don't corrupt them.

Memory allocation is a high-level concept, not an EVM concept. Its implementation in Solidity relies
on the value stored in the free memory pointer stored at location ``0x40``. That value tracks the next
unallocated memory address available. This is different from the highest memory address ever accessed
by the contract's code. Memory access opcodes in inline assembly are not restricted by the value of
the free memory pointer and can freely refer to memory located beyond it.

Every time you access memory, the EVM knows the location that was accessed. Roughly speaking, the

> maximum location you access determines the size of active memory. Increasing the size of

Reviewer: It's not just roughly speaking. This is the definition of active memory.

Reviewer: Fixed in the version I just pushed.

``0x40`` is just an ordinary memory location that is managed by code automatically generated by
the compiler. In inline assembly memory can be allocated manually by increasing the value of the
free memory pointer.

To be clear, there is nothing special about accessing the free memory pointer. Accessing the free
memory pointer itself is a memory access. After accessing the free memory pointer ``msize()`` would
(by definition) return a value that is no smaller than the location of the free memory pointer
plus its size: ``0x40 + 0x20``.

The memory between locations ``0x00`` and ``0x3F`` (inclusive) is called "scratch space." It exists
solely by convention. Solidity's generated code observes the convention that this area is for
extremely brief temporary use only. Since there is no guarantee that code not under your direct
control will not change that memory, you should not rely on its value being preserved between statements
except within the current assembly block.

The zero slot at ``0x60`` was used as the initial value for dynamic memory arrays by earlier versions
of Solidity, and may still be used for that purpose. It must never

> be written to. See :ref:`Layout of Arrays In Memory`.

Reviewer: Have we actually stopped using that slot recently?

Reviewer: Oh, I just looked at the other PR and I see where this came from: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/pull/12875#discussion_r843302419

So yeah, nothing changed, was and still is used.

  at ``0x40`` at least ensures that Solidity itself won't unexpectedly use memory
  located below its value.
  
  In brief, the memory between ``0x00 - 0x3F`` and the memory after the location
  pointed to by the free memory pointer can be considered scratch memory, and can be freely
  used between Solidity instructions via inline assembly, as long as you do not rely on it not being
  overwritten afterwards.

****************
Layout in Memory
****************

Layout of Arrays In Memory
==========================

Elements in memory arrays in Solidity always occupy multiples of 32 bytes, i.e.
one slot (this is even true for ``bytes1[]``, but not for ``bytes`` and ``string``).
Multi-dimensional memory arrays are pointers to memory arrays. The length of a
dynamic array is stored at the first slot of the array and followed by the array
elements.

Dynamically sized memory arrays (e.g., ``uint[]``) store their length in
the first slot pointed to by the array variable, followed by its elements in the following
slots. Although memory arrays are not resizable, they may be allocated dynamically using
the ``new`` keyword. In some versions of Solidity, the initial value of the dynamically

> sized memory array variable itself is set to ``0x60``, see

Reviewer 2: @aathan Where did you get this information?

Reviewer: I think this refers to the zero slot.

It's really an implementation detail. I'd just mention it when describing what the zero slot might be used for but I don't think it should be also mentioned here.

> :ref:`Reserved Memory Areas and Memory Management Details`. The slot at ``0x60``

Reviewer: This does not match any existing heading (you only have `Reserved Memory Areas`).
Also, this is not the right syntax for linking to a header. It would be this instead:
```rst
`Reserved Memory Areas`_
```
But it still has to match that header. If the header is different than the link text, you do it like this:
```rst
`Reserved Memory Areas and Memory Management Details <Reserved Memory Areas>`_
```

Reviewer: Fixed in the version I just pushed.

maintains a zero value (by convention). Once allocated, dynamically sized memory arrays
cannot change their size.

.. note::
    Inline assembly has the potential to corrupt
    the value in that slot, or could incorrectly change the length encoding of an array - see

>     :ref:`Memory Safety`. This issue is mentioned here purely for completeness. Corruption of

Reviewer: Not sure if it's even possible to link to a heading from a different file. We usually just insert anchors in that case. So this:
```suggestion
    :ref:`Memory Safety <assembly-memory-safety>`. This issue is mentioned here purely for completeness. Corruption of
```
will work as long as you insert an anchor with that name before the heading you want to link to:
```rst
.. _assembly-memory-safety:

Memory Safety
=============
```

Reviewer: Fixed in the version I just pushed.

Layout in Memory
****************

Reserved Memory Areas
=====================

Solidity reserves four 32-byte slots, with specific byte ranges (inclusive of endpoints) being used as follows:

- ``0x00`` - ``0x3f`` (64 bytes): scratch space for hashing methods
- ``0x40`` - ``0x5f`` (32 bytes): allocated memory size (aka. free memory pointer)
- ``0x60`` - ``0x7f`` (32 bytes): zero slot

Memory Allocation
-----------------

Solidity compiles to EVM instructions, and implements its complex data types on top of

> EVM features. Memory allocation is not an EVM feature. Inestead, Solidity implements its

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
EVM features. Memory allocation is not an EVM feature. Instead, Solidity implements its
```

> memory allocation via the free memory pointer stored at location ``0x40``. That value tracks the next

Reviewer 3: Could be misleading - you could read that in a way that it only tracks a single 32-byte memory "slot".

unallocated memory address available.

> The Solidity compiler generates code that always places new objects at the location pointed to by

Reviewer 3: I"m not sure I  would tie us down to that.

the free memory pointer.
In inline assembly memory can be allocated manually by increasing the value of the pointer.

> Memory located beyond the value of the free memory pointer is considered scratch memory.

Reviewer 3: Could be confused with the scratch space.

Access to memory in inline assembly is not restricted by the value of the free memory pointer
and can freely refer to memory located beyond it.

Allocated memory in Solidity is never freed.
In other words, the value of the free memory pointer is never reduced by Solidity.
This might change in future versions.

Active Memory and Memory Expansion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The concept of *allocated memory* is distinct and separate from *active memory*.

Reviewer 3: Is the term "active memory" used anywhere else?

Reviewer: Yep. It's actually in the Yellow Paper :)

The active memory size is tracked by the EVM and represents the highest memory address ever accessed
by the contract's code.
Its value is available via the inline assembly instruction ``msize()`` (see
the :ref:`list of opcodes <opcodes>`).

The size of allocated memory is managed by code automatically generated by the compiler,
which adjusts the value of the free memory pointer as necessary.
There are no dedicated opcodes for managing the pointer.
The slot holding pointer's value is just an ordinary memory location.

Accessing the free memory pointer itself is a memory access and after such an access ``msize()``

> would (by definition) return a value that is no smaller than the location of the pointer plus its size.

Reviewer 2: What does this statement mean?

Increasing the size of active memory is called *memory expansion* and incurs an extra gas cost that

> grows non-linearly the size of that memory.

Reviewer 2: I'd probably skip mentioning specifics on growth. In fact, the growth is almost linear: for one extra word, it is `(N + 1)^2 // 512 - N^2 // 512 + 3`.  Probably a nitpick.

Reviewer: It was actually my suggestion. Originally it only said vaguely that this affects gas in some way that's not worth getting into.

And, well, O(N^2) seems pretty non-linear to me :)

Reviewer: Ah, wait, it's not O(N^2). The subtraction will eliminate the N^2 component...

Reviewer: Here's what it said originally: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/pull/12884#discussion_r840850475

The specifics are beyond the scope of this documentation.
More information about gas costs can be found in the Etherum Yellow Paper and the documentation of
specific EVM implementations.

Scratch Space
-------------

> The memory between locations ``0x00`` and ``0x3F`` (inclusive) is called the *scratch space*. It exists

Reviewer 3: This whole file is only about conventions.

Layout in Memory
****************

Reserved Memory Areas
=====================

Solidity reserves four 32-byte slots, with specific byte ranges (inclusive of endpoints) being used as follows:

- ``0x00`` - ``0x3f`` (64 bytes): scratch space for hashing methods
- ``0x40`` - ``0x5f`` (32 bytes): allocated memory size (aka. free memory pointer)
- ``0x60`` - ``0x7f`` (32 bytes): zero slot

Memory Allocation
-----------------

> Solidity is a high level language that is translated (compiled) into EVM instructions. Its features

Reviewer 3: This section is about internals of the compiler. I think having to read two paragraphs of explanation what allocation is distracts from the useful information in this section.

by the contract's code.
Its value is available via the inline assembly instruction ``msize()`` (see
the :ref:`list of opcodes <opcodes>`).

The size of allocated memory is managed by code automatically generated by the compiler,
which adjusts the value of the free memory pointer as necessary.
There are no dedicated opcodes for managing the pointer.
The slot holding pointer's value is just an ordinary memory location.

Accessing the free memory pointer itself is a memory access and after such an access ``msize()``
would (by definition) return a value that is no smaller than the location of the pointer plus its size.

Increasing the size of active memory is called *memory expansion* and incurs an extra gas cost that
grows non-linearly the size of that memory.
The specifics are beyond the scope of this documentation.
More information about gas costs can be found in the Etherum Yellow Paper and the documentation of
specific EVM implementations.

Scratch Space
-------------

The memory between locations ``0x00`` and ``0x3F`` (inclusive) is called the *scratch space*. It exists
solely by convention. Solidity's generated code observes the convention that this area is for

> extremely brief temporary use only. Since there is no guarantee that code not under your direct

Reviewer 3: We should replace "extremely brief" by a more technical statement.

Layout in Memory
****************

Reserved Memory Areas
=====================

Solidity reserves four 32-byte slots, with specific byte ranges (inclusive of endpoints) being used as follows:

- ``0x00`` - ``0x3f`` (64 bytes): scratch space for hashing methods
- ``0x40`` - ``0x5f`` (32 bytes): allocated memory size (aka. free memory pointer)
- ``0x60`` - ``0x7f`` (32 bytes): zero slot

Memory Allocation
-----------------

Solidity compiles to EVM instructions, and implements its complex data types on top of
EVM features. Memory allocation is not an EVM feature. Instead, Solidity implements its
memory allocation via the free memory pointer stored at location ``0x40``. That value tracks the next
unallocated memory address available.

> The Solidity compiler generates code manages memory according to the free memory pointer; only the memory below what it points to is safe from being written to between Solidity statements or assembly blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Solidity compiler generates code that manages memory according to the free memory pointer; only the memory below what it points to is safe from being written to between Solidity statements or assembly blocks.
```

> The Solidity compiler generates code manages memory according to the free memory pointer; only the memory below what it points to is safe from being written to between Solidity statements or assembly blocks.

Reviewer: At first I read "below" as past the pointer. I think we need clearer wording.
```suggestion
The Solidity compiler generates code manages memory according to the free memory pointer.
Only the memory up to the address it points to is safe from being overwritten by the compiler between Solidity statements or assembly blocks.
```
Also, this is not 100% correct. The scratch space certainly is not safe from being overwritten.

In inline assembly memory can be allocated manually by increasing the value of the pointer.

Memory located beyond the value of the free memory pointer is considered additional scratch memory.

> To avoid confusion with the 64 bytes of scratch space at the beginning of memory we will refer to this as "temporary memory."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid confusion with the 64 bytes of scratch space at the beginning of memory we will refer to this as *temporary memory*.
```

Access to memory in inline assembly is not restricted by the value of the free memory pointer

> and can freely refer to the "temporary memory" located beyond it.

Reviewer: Now that the concept of temporary memory has been introduced above, we don't need to quote it:
```suggestion
and can freely refer to the temporary memory located beyond it.
```
And a few more instances below.

Allocated memory in Solidity is never freed.
In other words, the value of the free memory pointer is never reduced by Solidity.
This might change in future versions.

Active Memory and Memory Expansion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The concept of *allocated memory* is distinct and separate from *active memory*.

The active memory size is tracked by the EVM and represents the highest memory address ever accessed
by the contract's code.
Its value is available via the inline assembly instruction ``msize()`` (see
the :ref:`list of opcodes <opcodes>`).

The size of allocated memory is managed by code automatically generated by the compiler,
which adjusts the value of the free memory pointer as necessary.
There are no dedicated opcodes for managing the pointer.
The slot holding pointer's value is just an ordinary memory location.

.. note::
    To illustrate the operation of ``msize()`` consider any access to memory at any location.
    Such an access changes the value returned by ``msize()`` if it is beyond its current value,

>     but does not change the free memory pointer. ``msize()`` is an internal EVM value distinct from the free memory pointer,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    but does not change the free memory pointer. ``msize()`` returns an internal EVM value distinct from the free memory pointer,
```

    which is a Solidity managed concept that supports Solidity's memory management.

Increasing the size of active memory is called *memory expansion* and incurs an extra gas cost that
grows with the size of that active memory.
The specifics are beyond the scope of this documentation.

> More information about gas costs and ``msize()`` can be found in the Etherum Yellow Paper and the documentation of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More information about gas costs and ``msize()`` can be found in the Ethereum Yellow Paper and the documentation of
```

  larger than 64 bytes and therefore will not fit into the scratch space.
  Code for these operations therefore happens at the location pointed to
  by the free memory pointer. Because such operations are known to be complete
  before the next instruction or operation managed by Solidity, the generated
  code does not update the free memory pointer. The memory used in such operations
  may or may not be zeroed out after the operation is complete. Solidity's
  access of that memory may affect ``msize()``. Thus, it's reasonable to expect that

>   ``msize()`` is larger than the value of the free memory pointer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  ``msize()`` might be larger than the value of the free memory pointer.
```
(it is not always larger)
